---
layout: post
title: Interface Segregation Principle.
---
 
We have heard about this design principle in software development. 
Let's get straight into a problem and try and understand what this principle says!

Let us design an ATM (Automated Teller Machine).
An ATM has transactions. A transaction can be WithdrawalTransaction, DepositTransaction, TransferTransaction etc. 
Next, we have a UI for ATM, and UI can be Braille UI, Screen UI and Speech UI. 
Different `transactions` can speak to UI methods to publish their message, however, the message might differ based on a transaction.
Having a single UI interface having `RequestTransferAmount`, `RequestDepositAmount` that can work with all the types
wouldn't be the right solution here. It is because, a type of transaction, say DepositTransaction, can enforce a change to UI interface to add a new functionality, which would further lead to
changes in all the other transactions that extended the same UI. In short our the problem is: 

"A change in UI for solving a problem  with`DepositTransaction` resulted in changes with `TransferTransaction`. 

It looks like we need a UI for Withdraw, Deposit and Transfer.i.e, DepositUI, WithdrawUI and TransferUI. 

First stage of Solution: 
* All Transaction classes extend Transactions as expected. 
* We have separate DepositUI, WithdrawUI and TransferUI that gets mixed into `UI`. 
* A particular transaction won't work with `UI` since it is already fatty. You should be knowing what that possibly means.
* All transactions can then be provided with its corresponding `UI` type as given below.

Intent of doing this, clients should not be forced to depend on interfaces they don't use.

So, here we go: A part of the solution:

{% highlight java %}

interface DepositUI {
    public int requestDepositAmount();
}

interface WithDrawUI {
    public int requestWithDrawAmount();
}

interface UI extends DepositUI, WithDrawUI {
    
}

interface Transaction {
    public void execute();
}

class DepositTransaction implements Transaction {
    private DepositUI ui;

   public DepositTransaction(DepositUI ui) {
        this.ui = ui;
   }
    
   public void someCommonTransactionMethod(){
        // ..some implementation
   }

   public void execute() {
        ui.requestDepositAmount();
    }
}

class WithDrawTransaction implements  Transaction {
   private WithDrawUi ui;

   public WithDrawTransaction(WithDrawUi ui){
        this.ui = ui;
   }

   public void execute() {
     ui.requestWithDrawAmount();
   }
}

{% endhighlight %}

This is it!

#### A few more points to note

You may note that, DepositTransaction must know about DepositUI and Withdraw Transaction must know about WithDrawUI. As you can see,
we solved this problem by making the constructor of each type of transaction expecting the right type of UI. We could pass in the UI
as given below

{% highlight java %}

class ATM {

   UI gui;  //global object;

   DepositTransaction dt = new DepositTransaction(gui);
}

{% endhighlight %}

Another way of handling this problem is to have a global package listing down all types of UIs. i.e, static global objects. Hence we can avoid
passing in the UI during the construction of different transactions. However, they are two different approaches that allow us to follow 
Interface Segregation Principle. Please note that if these globals are put into a class instead of a package, that would be violation of the principle as we are in a way
combining all the interfaces together when we import this class to work with a specified transaction. Personally, I would go with the solution
given in the above example, that is, pass the right UI to the right transaction.


#### The polyad and monad - Monadic is not always the best approach
Assume that, We might be in need of a function `f` that has to access both DepositUI and
WithDrawUI. We could separately pass these UIs to f as given below. 

{% highlight java %}
  
  f(WithdrawUI, WithdrawUI)

{% endhighlight %}

We made the function polyadic, and passed multiple parameters into it. 
Let me quote a sentence from the book `Clean Code` written by Robert.C.Martin here

> A function with two arguments is harder to understand than a monadic function. For example, writeField(name) is easier to understand than writeField(output-stream, name).
> Dyads aren't evil, and you will certainly have to write them. However, you should be aware that they come at a cost and should take advantage of what mechanism may be available to you to convert them into monads.

In the above example, you might have noted that we are mixing in various UIs to have a UI type. Following the above quotes
let us make our function monadic. (You may note that UI in our example is a mix of all interfaces)

{% highlight java %}
  
  f(UI)

{% endhighlight %}

Here we made it monadic, however it comes with cost - it  drifted us away from following our interface segregation principle. That is, any change in any of the interface affects g and all of its clients
forcing it to recompile. Hence we prefer polyadic approach here..

