---
layout: post
title: State Transformers
---

A brief walk through...

## What is State transformer and STRef trying to achieve?

* Encapsulating stateful computations that manipulate multiple mutable objects in the context of non-strict purely functional language.
* Once the actions are encoded in ST, that if we try to access a naked mutable object, it throws a compilation error.

Let us define the ST monad (in scalaz). In the simplified form it is,

{% highlight scala %}
case class World[A]()

case class ST[S, A](f: World[S] => (World[S], A)) {
  def apply(s: World[S]) = ..
  def flatMap[B](g: A => ST[S, B]): ST[S, B] = ...
  def map[B](g: A => B): ST[S, B] = ....
}
x
def returnST[S, A](a: => A): ST[S, A] = ...
{% endhighlight %}

* Monad with unit as returnST and flatMap as flatMap itself.
* The difference between State and State-monad is, the state is mutated in place, and is not observable from outside.
* The `World` represents some state of the world. (I have [tried](https://github.com/afsalthaj/supaku-sukara/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/thaj/functionalprogramming/exercises/part1/PureStatefulAPIGeneric.scala#L129) to use scalaz's State instead of ST monad (basically, S instead of a World[S]) to solve the same problem, but got stuck in between. If interested, you may have a look at this line of code in my FP exercise repo. [implementations](https://github.com/afsalthaj/supaku-sukara/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/thaj/functionalprogramming/exercises/part1/PureStatefulAPIGeneric.scala#L163))
* It encapsulates a state transformer.
* The contents of the state doesn't really matter, but the type is (for what we want to do with ST monad - transform the state by mutating objects in place)
* Since type S is unique for a given ST, it is going to be a pure function.

# STRef

STRef is a mutable variable (updatable location in the state capabale of holding a value) that's used only with in the context of ST Monad. And that is, `ST[S, STRef[S, A]]` `` ```

{% highlight scala %}
case class STRef[S, A](a: A) { private var value: A = a

// only path-way to access the value (it will be encapsulated in ST) def read: ST[S, A] = returnST(value)

// associate the new value `a` to this reference. // write mutates the object in place. def write(a: A): ST[S, STRef[S, A]] = ...

// modifies the value at this reference, that is `read` and then `write` def mod[B](f: A => A): ST[S, STRef[S, A]] = ... }

def newVar(a: => A) = returnST(STRef(a))

{% endhighlight %}

A simplified version is [here] (<https://github.com/afsalthaj/supaku-sukara/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/thaj/functionalprogramming/exercises/part1/PureStatefulAPIGeneric.scala#L243>)

# Characteristics of STRef in a ST

* Playing around with STRef is going to be easy with the availability of monadic combinators. Have a look at the `mod` function as an [example](https://github.com/afsalthaj/supaku-sukara/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/thaj/functionalprogramming/exercises/part1/PureStatefulAPIGeneric.scala#L243).
* STRef is type parameterized by type S.
* S represents the state thread that created the reference (STRef) holding a value (updatable).
* A single state thread can't oversee other state thread, since they are of incompatible types.
* Since state transformers are composed sequentially, it's guaranteed that both of them won't mutate the same STRef/mutable-value.

# Taking STRef out of ST ? No....

* You shouldn't separate them.
* All your changes to the mutable value held by STRef, is done through ST (should be done)
* You might wonder, providing an initial value for world, and calling the `run` function in ST should be give STRef (that's wrong again)
* Providing an initial state for World[S], sounds right. Scalaz has its implementation here, where it is `Tower[A]` and providing an `IvoryTower` as its initial value. <https://github.com/scalaz/scalaz/blob/fabab8f699d56279d6f2cc28d02cc2b768e314d7/effect/src/main/scala/scalaz/effect/World.scala> (doesn't really matter)

## So what are we trying to achieve?

Exposing STRef by any chance should lead to compile time error, or in other words no freedom to compose STRef by itself without a State thread.

Examples

- i.e, `newVar(a).run` in scalaz will throw a compile time error.
- `newVar(a).flatMap(_.mod(_ + 1).flatMap(read)).run` exposes only `a` and not STRef(a) to the client making it super safe.
- Rank 2 polymorphism technique is used here.

{% highlight python %}

trait Forall[P[_]] { def apply[A]: P[A] }

def runST[A](f: Forall[({type F[S] = ST[S, A]})#F]): A = ... 

{% endhighlight %}


Refer to [my project]((https://github.com/afsalthaj/supaku-sukara/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/thaj/functionalprogramming/exercises/part1/PureStatefulAPIGeneric.scala#L243) for further examples, where we try to run the actions in many ways resulting in compile time errors.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
